+++
date = '2022-12-19'
title = "A simple comparison of Svelte and Vue"
tags = ['Svelte', 'Vue.js']
+++

Since its introduction in 2019, Svelte has quickly become one of the most loved JavaScript framework overtaking Vue.js in the State of JS ranking 2021 survey. This article presents a simple comparison of Vue.js and Svelte as an attempt to explain why.

Vue.js
------

The comparison starts with the Vue.js implementation of a simple counter button. As of version 3 of Vue.js, components can be written in either the Options API of Composition API fashion so both are shown hereunder.

### Options API

Here the counter button, written in Vue.js version 3 using the options API:

```
<template>
  <button @click="increment()">{{ count }}</button>
</template>

<script>
export default {
  data: () => ({
    count: 0
  }),
  methods: {
    increment(){
      this.count ++
    }
  }
}
</script>
```

The `<script>` section of the component involves a fair amount of boilerplate code which can throw some beginners off.

### Composition API

Vue.js version 3 introduces the composition API as well as the `setup` clause of the script tag which allows components to be written in a more concise way:

```
<template>
  <button @click="increment()">{{ count }}</button>
</template>

<script setup>
import { ref } from 'vue'
const count = ref(0)
const increment = () => {
  count.value ++
}
</script>
```

Although slightly more straightforward, the Composition API involves the use of `ref()` (or `reactive()`) for reactivity, which diverges from conventional JavaScript syntax.

Svelte
------

Here is the same counter button implemented in Svelte:

```
<button on:click={increment}>{count}</button>

<script>
let count = 0

const increment = () => {
    count ++
}
</script>
```

Clearly, this implementation is far more concise than its Vue.js equivalent as the `<template>` tag and usage of `ref()` are no longer needed.

This straightforward syntax is most likely one of the many reasons why Svelte became so popular and makes Svelte an ideal framework for beginners to learn.